Here are the 10 selected questions, complete with their answers and full
explanations from the document, presented in the recommended order for
your lecture.

Part 1: Describing Clinical Data (The Fundamentals)

Question 1 of 10 (Original Question #4)

A physician has been collecting data on adolescent patients’ body mass
indices (BMIs). The physician is now trying to determine whether BMI is
associated with glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) levels. It is hypothesized
that there should be an association because higher BMIs are associated
with type 2 diabetes mellitus and because people with uncontrolled
diabetes mellitus have elevated HbA1c levels. The physician has
collected data on 300 patients over the past 6 months.Of the following,
the variable type that BEST describes BMI and HbA1c is:

A. continuous

B. discrete

C. nominal

D. ordinal

Correct Answer: A. continuous

PREP Pearl(s):

-   Numerical scales include 1) Continuous scales, where the variables
    can be measured and have an infinite number of values, and 2)
    Discrete scales, which can be counted and have a finite number of
    values.

-   Nominal scales are used when the data can be placed into categories
    that do not have a hierarchical relationship to each other, such as
    hair color or blood type.

-   Ordinal scales are used when the categories are placed in an order
    that has meaning or hierarchy, such as Likert scale.

Critique:

Measurement scales are divided into 3 main groups: nominal, ordinal, and
numerical. Nominal scales are used when the data fit into categories. An
example of a variable that uses a nominal scale is blood type; ie, there
are 4 possible blood type categories: A, B, AB, and O. The categories
have names, but there is no hierarchical relationship between them. If
there are only 2 categories, then the variable is said to be dichotomous
or binary; eg, responses to a true–false statement.When a hierarchical
relationship exists, the variable uses an ordinal scale. The categories
can be placed in an order that has meaning. A Likert scale uses ordinal
variables. A typical Likert item requires the study participant to rate
their agreement with a statement. Possible responses are rated as
follows: (1) strongly agree, (2) agree, (3) neither agree nor disagree,
(4) disagree, and (5) strongly disagree. There is a directionality or
order to these responses. An important characteristic of an ordinal
scale is that the difference between categories is not the same across
the scale. Using the Likert scale example, the difference between an
“agree” and a “strongly agree” response is not inherently the same as
the difference between a “neither agree nor disagree” and an
“agree.”When the difference between values of a variable is consistent
or equal, the variable uses a numerical scale. Numerical scales are
further divided into continuous and discrete. Continuous scales have an
infinite number of values, while discrete scales have a finite number of
values. For example, if one is measuring body mass indices (BMIs) and
glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) levels in a population, theoretically one
can carry the measure out to an infinite number of decimal places
depending on the precision of the height and weight scale and the HbA1c
instrument. In reality, BMI is usually only carried out to the 10th or
100th decimal place and the same with HbA1c, but these variables can be
measured on a continuous scale. On the other hand, if one wanted to
determine the number of cigarettes per day that individuals smoke, one
would use a discrete scale of integers. If the range of cigarettes
smoked by the population is between 0 and 60 per day, then one has a
finite number of values.Knowing what type of scale the variable uses is
important in order to make the right choice about the statistical test
to use. As an example, if one wanted to test for a significant
relationship or association between frequencies of 2 dichotomous
variables, an appropriate statistical test would be the Chi-square test.
The Chi-square can also be used for nominal variables with more than 2
groups; however, caution is needed because the test will not be valid
when there are too many groups and an inadequately sized sample. For the
example in the vignette, the Pearson Correlation would be appropriate to
test for an association between the 2 continuous variables of BMI and
HgbA1c.

Question 2 of 10 (Original Question #5)

A researcher is designing a clinical trial and developing the data
collection forms. The researcher wants to collect information regarding
household income, and, instead of leaving a blank area for the
participant to report their income, the researcher provides the
following choices: less than $50,000, $50,000 to $75,000, $75,001 to
$100,000, and greater than $100,000.Of the following, the BEST way to
describe this income variable is:

A. continuous variable

B. dichotomous variable

C. nominal variable

D. ordinal variable

Correct Answer: D. ordinal variable

PREP Pearl(s):

-   Variables are either continuous or categorical.

-   Categorical variables can further be described as dichotomous (2
    distinct choices), nominal (>2 categories, no order/hierarchy), or
    ordinal (>2 categories with a specific order/hierarchy).

Critique:

In the vignette, there are 4 distinct categories of income, with the
continuous variable category indicating the lowest income level and the
ordinal variable category indicating the highest income level. This
classifies this variable as an ordinal value.A continuous variable is a
quantitative, numerical data point with an infinite number of
possibilities along a continuum, such as height, weight, blood pressure,
IQ, and yearly income. One family’s yearly income may be $80,125,
another may be $80,126.50, and yet another may be $81,100.16.This is in
contrast to a categorical variable, which is a qualitative, discrete
variable with a limited number of possibilities. There are 3 main types
of categorical variables: dichotomous, nominal, and ordinal.

-   Dichotomous variables are variables or descriptive characteristics
    that can only be divided into 2 categories, for example, has
    disease/doesn’t have disease, yes/no, or male/female.

-   Variables with more than 2 categories are either nominal or ordinal
    variables. Examples are eye color (green, blue, brown), race (per US
    Census Bureau: white, Black/African American, American Indian/Alaska
    Native, Asian, Native Hawaiian/other Pacific Islander), and Likert
    pain scales (no hurt, hurts little bit, hurts little more, hurts
    even more, hurts whole lot, hurts worst). When the categorical
    variable has an order or hierarchy to it (hurts worst > no hurt),
    this is considered an ordinal variable. When there is no
    order/hierarchy (eye color, race), then the variable is a nominal
    variable.

Sometimes variables that could be continuous variables (eg, income
level) are collected or reported as categorical variables (as described
in the vignette: <$50,000, $50,000-$75,000, $75,001-$100,000, >$100,000)
instead of being reported as a distinct/exact number (ie, $80,101).
Another common example of this is with blood pressure (ordinal
variables: normotensive, prehypertensive, stage I hypertension, stage II
hypertension) instead of being reported as a continuous variable (135/88
mm Hg). This is occasionally done for ease of reporting or describing
study populations or because of statistical considerations (calculating
an odds ratio, investigating for interaction, etc).

Question 3 of 10 (Original Question #1)

A hospitalist is working on a quality improvement project related to
bronchiolitis. A team member has proposed an intervention package that
they believe will reduce length of stay by 25%. The hospitalist is
gathering length-of-stay data from the past 3 bronchiolitis seasons to
set the baseline metric for the project. The histogram and descriptive
statistics are shown in Figure 1.Of the following, the MOST accurate
assessment of the baseline data is that:

A. the large number of outliers precludes accurate estimation of length
of stay

B. the mean is the most appropriate measure of length of stay

C. the median is the most appropriate measure of length of stay

D. there is a 95% certainty that the true mean is between 30 and 88
hours

Correct Answer: C. the median is the most appropriate measure of length
of stay

PREP Pearl(s):

-   Preferred measures of central tendency include the mean for normally
    distributed data and the median for skewed data.

-   The mean is sensitive to change from outliers, while the median is
    resistant to change from outliers.

-   Measures of dispersion include variance and standard deviation when
    the data are normally distributed and the interquartile range when
    data are skewed.

Critique:

When data are normally distributed, they can be described and
characterized using any measure of central tendency, mean or median,
because they are equal to each other. However, when the data are skewed,
the mean and the median may differ significantly. The data in the
vignette are skewed. Specifically, they are right skewed; the majority
of points are clustered at lower values while higher values are more
widely distributed. Because the baseline data are skewed, the median is
the more appropriate measure of the length of stay.Core knowledge in
basic statistics is essential for all pediatricians. When data are
summarized, it is critical to apply the appropriate measures of central
tendency and variation. There are 3 main measures of central tendency:
mean, median, and mode:

-   The mode is the result that occurs most frequently.

-   The mean is the arithmetic average of all the data points.

-   The median is the middle point of the data set; half of the data
    points are greater than the median, while half of the data points
    are below the median.

When data are normally distributed, the mean, median, and mode are all
equal; therefore, it does not matter which method of central tendency is
used to describe the data set. However, when the mode < median < mean,
the distribution is right or positively skewed. Conversely, the
distribution is left skewed when the mean < median < mode. When skewed
data are encountered, the mean is not the preferred measure of central
tendency because the value of the mean is greatly influenced by
outliers. In this situation, the median is a better measure of central
tendency because it is resistant to the presence of outliers. This is
shown in Figure 1, when the mean and median are compared. There are
several very large outliers (several children who have greater than
500-hour-long hospital stays) in this sample. These large outliers
inflate the value of the mean. However, because the median is affected
by the total number of observations and not by outlying observations, it
is a more accurate representation of the typical length of stay in a
skewed sample.

Question 4 of 10 (Original Question #2)

Data obtained on elements of the complete blood count in 2- to
24-month-old infants and children with viral infections are being
compared with data in those with confirmed bacterial infection.Of the
following, and assuming continuous variables and a normal distribution,
the measure of central tendency that yields the BEST descriptive
information for evaluating the components of the complete blood count in
this study is:

A. mean

B. median

C. mode

D. range

Correct Answer: A. mean

PREP Pearl(s):

-   Mean, median, and mode are collectively called measures of central
    tendency and are numerical representations of descriptive
    statistics.

-   Mean is the calculated average of all reported numerical data and is
    most useful in reporting a set of normally distributed continuous
    data points (interval and ratio observations).

-   Median is the midpoint of a reported set of data (average of the 2
    middle data points if there is an even number of observations) and
    is best used to report ordinal data.

-   Mode is the most commonly reported numerical observation in a set of
    data and is best used to describe nominal data.

Critique:

Mean, median, and mode are numerical representations of descriptive
statistics and are collectively called measures of central tendency.
They are used to summarize and characterize a collection of study
observations and are often presented in tables, graphs, or histograms.
In this example, the mean of the data set is the most important
description of central tendency. Although median and mode are also
measures of central tendency and could be reported for this data set,
they are better measures of central tendency for other types of outcome
data. Range is a measure of the dispersion of data.Mean (or average) is
the central value of a discrete set of numbers and is derived by summing
all the numerical observations and dividing by the number of individual
observations. Mean is most useful in describing central tendency for
interval and ratio data, which are also called continuous data.

Question 5 of 10 (Original Question #3)

An 11-year-old boy is experiencing unexplained weight loss. He has vague
symptoms of decreased appetite, and his parents have seen a gradual
decrease in oral intake. When he was seen a year ago for a health
supervision visit, he was growing along the 30th percentile for weight
and 50th percentile for height. At his visit this year, he has lost 3.63
kg (8.00 lb). His current height and weight are shown in Figure 1.Of the
following, assuming weights are distributed normally, this boy’s weight
falls:

A. 1 to 2 standard deviations from the mean

B. 2 to 3 standard deviations from the mean

C. greater than 3 standard deviations from the mean

D. less than 1 standard deviation from the mean

Correct Answer: A. 1 to 2 standard deviations from the mean

PREP Pearl(s):

-   Ninety-five percent of normally distributed data points fall within
    2 standard deviations of the mean, which is equivalent to the 3rd to
    97th percentiles.

-   Z scores measure how far away a plot is from the population mean.

Critique:

In this vignette, the boy’s weight-for-age has fallen to about the 5th
percentile, which is between 1 standard deviation (SD) (2.5th
percentile) below the average weight for boys his age. SD is a measure
of how far the data are spread out from the mean, or average, of the
group.When data are normally distributed and follow a bell-shaped curve,
empiric rules exist about the distribution of data around the mean.

-   Sixty-eight percent of the data points fall within 1 SD of the mean.
    On a growth curve, this would represent the 16th to 84th
    percentiles.

-   Ninety-five percent of all data points are distributed within 2 SD
    of the mean, which are about the 3rd and 97th percentiles.

-   Three SD represents 99.7% of all data points distributed around the
    mean.

Z scores for height, weight, and body mass index also use SD to compare
an individual’s growth to that of the general population. For the child
in the vignette, the 5th percentile is equivalent to 1.65 SD below the
mean (−1.65). This SD “score” is the Z score, which is a numeric
representation of how far above or below the mean a data point lies. A Z
score is derived by subtracting the individual’s value from the
population mean and dividing by the SD of the entire reference
population. An individual at the 50th percentile has a Z score of zero.
Z scores of ±2.0 are essentially equivalent to 2 SD above and below the
mean, or again, the 3rd and 97th percentiles. Therefore, Z scores
greater than 2.0 or less than −2.0 are outside the “normal” cutoff
values.

Part 2: Foundational Epidemiology & Diagnostic Testing

Question 6 of 10 (Original Question #8)

A screening program conducted at a high school is screening student
athletes with electrocardiography to identify undiagnosed heart disease.
Of 1,000 students, 2 students are found to have a prolonged QT
interval.Of the following, the parameter of long QT syndrome that can
BEST be calculated by these data is the:

A. incidence

B. odds ratio

C. prevalence

D. relative risk

Correct Answer: C. prevalence

PREP Pearl(s):

-   Prevalence is the number of affected cases in a specific population
    at a given point in time.

-   Incidence is the number of new cases that develop over a specific
    period.

-   Pretest probability is the probability of disease before a
    diagnostic test is ordered; posttest probability is the likelihood
    of disease after the result of a diagnostic test is known.

Critique:

The data that are given include the number of affected cases in a
specific population at a given point in time—in other words, the
prevalence.

Incidence is the number of new cases that develop over a specific
period.

The relative risk is an estimate of the extent of the association
between an exposure to a risk factor and a disease. It can be thought of
as the likelihood of developing a certain disease after exposure to a
certain risk factor, or as the incidence of disease in the exposed group
divided by the incidence of disease in the unexposed group.

The odds ratio, on the other hand, is the odds of exposure in those with
the disease compared with the odds of exposure in those without the
disease.

Question 7 of 10 (Original Question #9)

A recent article described the epidemiology of celiac disease in an
inner city community. The study evaluated a city with 50,000 children
without celiac disease at the start of the study. At the end of the
5-year period, the following number of children were diagnosed with
celiac disease.

-   Year 1: 5 New Celiac Cases

-   Year 2: 5 New Celiac Cases

-   Year 3: 5 New Celiac Cases

-   Year 4: 10 New Celiac Cases

-   Year 5: 10 New Celiac Cases

Of the following, the annual INCIDENCE rate of celiac disease per
100,000 patients in this study is:

A. 5

B. 7

C. 14

D. 35

Correct Answer: C. 14

PREP Pearl(s):

-   Incidence measures new occurrences of a disease in a population over
    a specified period and indicates the risk of contracting a disease.
    It is generally seen in cohort studies.

-   Prevalence represents the magnitude of a disease, is widespread, and
    is seen in cross-sectional studies.

Critique:

Disease frequency is measured using prevalence and incidence. Incidence
is the number of new cases in a given period divided by the size of the
population initially at risk for the disease. Incidence represents the
risk probability of diseases in a population within a set period. In the
vignette, if a population initially contains 50,000 at-risk individuals
with 35 people who develop celiac disease over a 5-year period while
they were under the risk, the incidence is 7 in 50,000 or 14 per
100,000.

-   Total new cases = 5 + 5 + 5 + 10 + 10 = 35 cases over 5 years.

-   Average annual cases = 35 / 5 = 7 new cases per year.

-   Annual incidence rate = (7 new cases per year / 50,000 population) =
    0.00014

-   Rate per 100,000 = 0.00014 * 100,000 = 14 per 100,000.

Prevalence is a proportion representing the number of existing cases of
a disease, both new and old cases, in a population over a specified
time. Prevalence measures how widespread a disease is in a population.

Question 8 of 10 (Original Question #6)

An infant is admitted to the intensive care unit with septic shock.
There is concern regarding the development of acute kidney injury and
uncertainty about the ability of a new blood test to identify acute
kidney injury compared to the current methods. A recent study presented
the following information: among 200 children admitted with septic
shock, 100 developed acute kidney injury. Of those who developed acute
kidney injury, the test was positive in 70 children. However, the test
was also positive in 10 children who did not develop acute kidney
injury.Of the following, based on these results, the SENSITIVITY of the
new blood test for detecting acute kidney injury is:

A. 10%

B. 30%

C. 70%

D. 90%

Correct Answer: C. 70%

PREP Pearl(s):

-   The sensitivity of a test is the number of positive results among
    those with the condition. A highly sensitive test is good for ruling
    out disease when negative.

-   The specificity of a test is the number of negative results among
    those without the condition. A highly specific test is good for
    ruling in disease when positive.

Critique:

Sensitivity and specificity are common measures of a test’s accuracy.
Sensitivity describes the ability of a test to identify patients with
the condition of interest (ie, true positives), and is expressed as the
percentage of patients with the condition who have a positive test
result. Specificity, on the other hand, describes the ability to
identify patients without the condition of interest (ie, true
negatives), expressed as the percentages of patients without the
condition who have a negative test result.To determine the sensitivity
and specificity of a test, it is often helpful to create a 2x2 table.

-   Total patients = 200

-   Have acute kidney injury (AKI) = 100

-   Do not have AKI = 100

-   Test positive in those with AKI (True Positives) = 70

-   Test positive in those without AKI (False Positives) = 10

The sensitivity of the test would be the number of true positives
divided by the total number of children with the disease: 70 / 100 (ie,
70%).

The specificity would be the number of true negatives divided by the
total number of children without the disease. The number of true
negatives is 100 (without AKI) - 10 (false positives) = 90. So,
specificity is 90 / 100 (ie, 90%).

Question 9 of 10 (Original Question #7)

A research article describes a potential new serum screening test for
eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE). One hundred children are recruited in
the study. Of these 100 children, esophageal biopsy findings were
consistent with EoE in 25, and 75 children did not have histologic
evidence of EoE. The screening test results in all subjects demonstrated
the following:

-   Of the 25 with EoE, the screening test was positive in 20 and
    negative in 5.

-   Of the 75 without EoE, the screening test was negative in 65 and
    positive in 10.

Of the following, the sensitivity and specificity of the screening test
are:

A. Sensitivity 20.0%, Specificity 75.0%

B. Sensitivity 80.0%, Specificity 86.7%

C. Sensitivity 80.0%, Specificity 25.0%

D. Sensitivity 20.0%, Specificity 25.0%

(Note: The original document has a typo in the provided options/answer
for specificity. The calculation based on the text is 65/75 = 86.7%, not
75%. This is a good teaching point about critically reviewing source
material.)

Correct Answer: B. Sensitivity 80.0%, Specificity 86.7%

PREP Pearl(s):

-   Sensitivity is the ability of a test to correctly detect those
    patients with the disease, while specificity is the ability of a
    test to correctly identify those without the disease.

-   Sensitivity and specificity values do not vary based on the
    prevalence of disease.

Critique:

When calculating sensitivity and specificity, a table may be helpful:

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
                       Presence of Disease (+)    Absence of Disease (-)
  ------------------- -------------------------- -------------------------
  Test Positive (+)       20 (True Positive)        10 (False Positive)

  Test Negative (-)       5 (False Negative)        65 (True Negative)
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

The equation used to calculate sensitivity is: True positive / (True
positive + False negative)

Therefore, the sensitivity of the blood test for EoE would be: 20 /
(20 + 5) = 80%Specificity can be calculated with the following equation:
True negative / (True negative + False positive)

Therefore, the specificity of the blood test for EoE would be: 65 /
(65 + 10) = 86.7%

Part 3: A Critical Capstone Concept

Question 10 of 10 (Original Question #26)

The health editor of a parenting magazine inquires about a study that
was recently published in a peer-reviewed journal. The study examined
the relationship between toddler thumb-sucking and later food allergy.Of
the following, based on the provided scatterplot (Figure 1), the MOST
appropriate conclusion to draw from this study is that thumb-sucking:

A. is associated with a lower incidence of food allergy

B. is a result of food allergy

C. is unrelated to the incidence of food allergy

D. lowers the incidence of food allergy

Correct Answer: A. is associated with a lower incidence of food allergy

PREP Pearl(s):

-   The terms “association” and “dependence” describe a relationship
    between 2 variables.

-   Two variables may be associated with or without correlation.
    Correlation means a positive or negative trend between 2 variables.

-   Correlation does not automatically imply causation.

Critique:

In particular, the concepts of association, correlation, and causation
are often used interchangeably, when in fact they have very different
meanings. Two values are dependent, or associated, if one value affects
the other. However, association does not automatically imply causality,
because there may be other confounding factors that affect the
relationship between the 2 variables.Association and correlation,
however, have different meanings. A scatterplot is useful for
determining whether association and correlation are present. Association
means that one value is affected by another or provides information
about another. Correlation means that there is a positive or negative
trend between the 2 variables.

-   In a positive correlation, as one variable (x) increases, the other
    variable (y) also increases.

-   In a negative correlation, as x increases, y decreases.

The scatter plot from the study described in the vignette shows an
association with negative correlation. As the number of months of
thumb-sucking increases, the number of food allergies decreases. Thus,
the 2 variables are related, so it is inaccurate to conclude that
thumb-sucking is not related to the incidence of food allergy. However,
the demonstrated correlation does not imply causation, therefore
"thumb-sucking lowering the incidence of food allergy" and "being the
result of food allergy" are also incorrect. One might hypothesize about
a mechanism by which the relationship occurs, but this study is not
adequate to prove causation.
